---
title: Participating in a Hearing
date: 2010-04-21 20:46:00 Z
order: 2
description: Familiarize yourself with the procedures and evidence guidelines that govern LAAS hearings.
by: Cooper Mayne
icon: loader
questions:
- question: What if a witness wrote a statement out instead of appearing at the hearing?  Can
    their written statement be submitted into evidence?
  answer: Written statements by people not physically present to testify at the hearing
    are typically not afforded weight by Hearing Examiners since such statements do
    not give the opposing party the opportunity to cross-examine that witness.  This
    is especially true when the statement is not a sworn declaration under penalty
    of perjury.
- question: Can I submit additional evidence to the Hearing Examiner during the hearing?
  answer: Yes. Additional documents, photographs, or videos can be submitted as evidence
    during the hearing if they are relevant to the incident(s). [More info](#submitting-new-evidence-during-hearing)
- question: Is my attorney allowed to come?
  answer: 'Attorneys are allowed, but certainly not required.

'
- question: Are language interpreters provided?
  answer: |
    Yes.

    It is most helpful to contact the Department in advance to request one. [link to contact info]
- question: What happens after the hearing?
  answer: |
    The Hearing Examiner takes in all of the evidence from the hearing – including the sworn testimony of those who testified at the hearing and any documents submitted.  He or she then writes a report to the General Manager of the Department.  The report summarizes the evidence collected and recommends what the outcome of the case should be.

    [[Click here]] to read more about the possible outcomes of a Hearing
- question: How does the Department determine what the outcome of the case should
    be?
  answer: 'The Hearing Examiner must apply the evidence presented during the hearing
    to the 11 factors listed in LAMC Section 53.34.4(c). Read more about the factors
    [[here]]

'
layout: post
---

# Hearing Procedure

The hearing is conducted by a Hearing Examiner appointed by the General Manager of the Department.  The Hearing Examiner will begin by reading an opening statement informing the parties of the procedures for the hearing and basic terminology.  The Examiner will also administer an oath to everyone present who intends to testify.  All testimony given must be the truth; lying while under oath is perjury, a criminal offense.  For the hearing, the alleged victim is referred to as the “Complaining Witness” and the animal owner is referred to as the “Respondent.”

The Examiner will then begin asking questions to the Complaining Witness.  Some of the questions the Hearing Examiner asks will be based upon a document called “Exhibit 1.”  Exhibit 1 is a summary of the preliminary investigation of the incident conducted by a Department Animal Control Officer.  (Animal owners should receive an advance copy of Exhibit 1 in the mail with their summons.  If you are a Respondent in an upcoming hearing and did not receive a copy of Exhibit 1, YOU CAN REQUEST ONE HERE.  The Complaining Witness may also submit any additional relevant photographs or documents during this time.  Finally, the Respondent will have an opportunity to cross-examine the Complaining Witness. 

This process will be repeated with any additional witnesses who plan to testify on behalf of the Complaining Witness.  Finally, the Hearing Examiner will ask questions of the Respondent, and the Complaining Witness will have an opportunity to cross-examine them afterward.  The process will be repeated for any additional witnesses who plan to testify on behalf of the Respondent.   Because the Respondent and their animal are presumed innocent until proven otherwise, the Respondent may choose not to testify at all if they feel that insufficient evidence has been presented against them.

# Submitting New Evidence During Hearing
Additional documents, photographs, or videos can be submitted as evidence during the hearing if they are relevant to the incident(s).  Additional relevant evidence is welcome and encouraged.  Bear in mind that in addition to the audio recording of the hearing, any additional evidence submitted during the hearing becomes public record and can be disclosed upon request.  Also bear in mind that, in order to consider the evidence, the Hearing Examiner will have to ask you to explain what the evidence is and what its relevance to the case is.  The opposing party also must have an opportunity to examine the evidence and ask you questions about it on cross-examination.

For victims/complaining witnesses, documents from health care providers detailing medical treatment received from the alleged animal incident can be especially helpful to the Hearing Examiner.  Photographs of injuries or the scene of the incident can also be helpful.  Documents such as bills or invoices are less helpful without showing what specific medical treatment was received.

For animal owners/respondents, documents or photographs showing how the dog is confined or maintained at home – including photographs of gates, fences, etc. – can be especially helpful to the Hearing Examiner.  Documents detailing any professional training the animal has received can also be helpful.  Finally, evidence of any remedial measures taken since the alleged incident (for example: additional locks on gates at home) can also be helpful to the Hearing Examiner.

Evidence attempting to attest to the character of the dog by neighbors, friends, etc. are not typically afforded much weight by Hearing Examiners.  This is especially true when the evidence is a written statement by someone who is not physically present to testify at the hearing.


# What Makes a Dog "Dangerous"?

The Hearing Examiner must apply the evidence presented during the hearing to the 11 factors listed in LAMC Section 53.34.4(c).  Those 11 factors are:

1. Any previous history of the dog or other animal attacking, biting or causing injury to a human being or other animal;
2. The nature and extent of injuries inflicted and the number of victims involved;
3. The place where the bite, attack or injury occurred;
4. The presence or absence of any provocation for the bite, attack or injury;
5. The extent to which property has been damaged or destroyed;
6. Whether the dog or other animal exhibits any characteristics of being trained for fighting or attack or other evidence to show such training or fighting;
7. Whether the dog or other animal exhibits characteristics of aggressive or unpredictable temperament or behavior in the presence of human beings or dogs or other animals;
8. Whether the dog or other animal can be effectively trained or retrained to change its temperament or behavior;
9. The manner in which the dog or other animal had been maintained by its owner or custodian;
10. Any other relevant evidence concerning the maintenance of the dog or other animal;
11. Any other relevant evidence regarding the ability of the owner or custodian, or the Department, to protect the public safety in the future if the dog or other animal is permitted to remain in the City.

'
# Possible Outcomes of a Hearing

In accordance with Los Angeles Municipal Code 53.34.4, the Hearing Examiner can recommend to the General Manager one of four possible outcomes:
## 1. Dismissal
If the evidence is insufficient to determine that a bite, attack, or injury occurred; or, if the bite, attack or injury occurred but was minimal in nature, the case will be dismissed.

## 2. Animal License Reissued with Terms & Conditions on Ownership
If the evidence presented shows that a bite, attack or injury occurred, but the severity of the incident would not warrant declaring the animal “dangerous,” the owner’s privilege of keeping the dog in Los Angeles will be extended – with reasonable terms, conditions, and restrictions intended to prevent circumstances like those that gave rise to the need for a hearing.  For more information about the issuance of and compliance with Terms & Conditions, see [LINK TO SECTION ON TERMS & CONDITIONS].

## 3. Animal License Revoked
If the evidence presented shows that a bite, attack or injury occurred, and that the Respondents are unwilling or unable to take corrective measures (or if they fail to appear at the hearing), their license to own animals in the City of Los Angeles may be revoked.  A revoked license means that the animal must be removed from the City of Los Angeles.  It further prohibits the Respondent from maintaining any dog in the City of Los Angeles for three years.  Failure to remove a dog from the City after its license has been revoked is a criminal misdemeanor.

## 4. Animal Declared Dangerous and Destroyed
If the evidence presented shows that the attack, bite, or injury is so severe that the Department believes the dog cannot be maintained either inside or outside Los Angeles without jeopardizing public safety, the animal will be declared dangerous and humanely killed.  It is illegal to keep any animal declared to be dangerous.  This outcome is only availed of in the most extreme circumstances.  For information on Los Angeles’ goal to become a “no-kill” city, click here.
